---
layout: post
title: "Native Son & Free Will"
---

The issue of free will is at the heart of Richard Wright's *Native Son*. Though
the title of his work's third book, "Fate", Wright directly acknowledges the
centrality of free will in *Native Son*. Like most aspects of *Native Son*, the
work's treatment of this philosophical issue seems unclear; characters at times
seem fatalistic while at others proclaim and celebrate their independence. This
apparent contradiction is in fact a necessary part of Wright's thesis: that in
an unequal society *all* members of society are stripped of their freedom.

Man appears unattached to his worldly possessions or to his life when
considering the vehemency with which he will insist on his free will. Tell a man
that his country needs him or that the book by his nightstand is the unerrant
word of God and he will be readily subdued, but suggest that he is not in
control of his actions and he will be more skeptical than any scientist.

Wright is aware of this aspect of human nature, and does not hesitate to remind
us of how problematic this view is. Long before reaching the unfolding of
Bigger's crimes (perhaps before ever opening the front cover), the reader is
*certain* that a terrible future awaits the tale's main character. Bigger too is
certain of his fate: "All his life he had been knowing that sooner or later
something like this [murder] would come to him. And now, here it was." Yet,
despite this certainty, the reader still attributes freedom to Bigger's actions.
This uneasy contradiction opens the reader up to the possibility that she may be
irrationally clinging to free will herself. This consciousness helps the reader
observe the book's events from a more rational point of view, and makes Wright's
thesis more palatable.

We can identify three classes in Wright's work: blacks, whites sensitive to the
predicament of blacks, and whites who are not. We shall see that in none of
these groups can any sort of free will be found, and that the source of this
lack of freedom is the stratification of the society they live in.

It is pretty clear that Bigger is not in control of his own life. The book
begins with Bigger deciding between a job or a life of crime. Neither will lift
him out of poverty. He is despondent and painfully aware of his lack of options.
His entire life has been predefined by the color of his skin and the emptiness
of his wallet.

It would appear that my argument falls apart when Bigger experiences freedom
after twice committing murder. Contemplating his actions, Bigger experiences
